like once you sit here
well thank you before we get started I
think you know there were some pioneers
of course we have the pioneers here on
stage but there were some other really
important pioneers in the video we just
saw and a couple of them are here in the
audience so Mitch Kapoor who is a
regular D could you just stand up and ER
and and Fred Gibbons who has not come to
D before but is here tonight Fred
there's Fred right there and I don't
know if he's in the room but I do want
to recognize our fellow journalist Brent
slender from fortune who did the last to
my knowledge the last joint interview
these guys did it was not on a stage but
it was a Fortune magazine interview
Brent I don't know if you're in the room
for you are can you stand maybe he's
over there so let's get started um I
wanted to ask there's been a lot of like
mano-a-mano catfight kind of thing in a
lot of the blogs and the press and stuff
like that and we wanted to the first
kitchen cabinet was interested in asking
is what you think each has contributed
to the computer and technology industry
starting with you Steve for Bill and
vice versa
um well you know Bill built the first
software company in the industry and I
think he built the first software
company before anybody really in our
industry knew what a software company
was except for these guys and that was
huge that was really huge and the
business model that they ended up
pursuing turned out to be the one that
worked really well you know for the
industry so I think but the biggest
thing was Bill was really focused on
software before almost anybody else had
a clue that it was really the software
that's that's what I see I mean a lot of
other things you could say but that's
the high order bit and I think building
a company is really hard and and it
requires it requires your greatest
persuasive abilities to hire the best
people you can and keep them keep them
keep them at your company and keep them
working you know doing the best work of
their lives hopefully and Bill's been
able to stay with it for all these years
so bill how about the contribution of
Steve and Apple well first I want to
clarify I'm not fake Steve Jobs
you know what Steve Zahn is quite
phenomenal you know if you look back to
1977 that Apple - computer the idea that
it would be a mass-market machine now
the bet that was made there by Apple
uniquely there were other people with
products but the idea that this could be
an incredible empowering phenomena Apple
pursued that dream you know then one of
the most fun things we did it was the
Macintosh and that was so risky and
people may not remember that Apple
really bet the company Lisa hadn't done
that well and you know some people were
saying okay that general approach wasn't
good but the team that Steve built even
within the company to pursue that even
some days that felt a little ahead of
its time
I don't remember that twiggy disk drive
Andrew 28k yeah and AH the Twiggy disk
drive yes Steve gave a speech once which
is one of my favorites where he talked
about in a certain sense we build the
products that we want to use ourselves
and you know so he's really pursued that
with incredible taste and elegance that
has had a huge impact on the industry
and his ability to always come around
and figure out where that next bet
should be has been phenomenal you know
Apple literally was failing when Steve
went back and reenact a 'king that have
been phenomenal so the industry's
benefited immensely from his his work we
both been lucky to be part of it but you
know I'd say he's contributed as much as
anyone we've also we've also both been
incredibly lucky to have had great
partners that we started the companies
with and we've attracted great people I
mean so everything that's been done at
Microsoft and Apple has been done by
just remarkable people none of what
you're sitting up here you know today
not out you're sort of the
haha that we're not us and you're sort
of your so you're in a way you're the
standings for all those other people in
a way we are
I'm very tangible way so bill mentioned
the Apple two in 1977 and thirty years
ago and there were a couple of other
computers with which were aimed at the
idea that average people might be able
to use them and looking back on it and a
really average average person might not
have been able to use them by today's
standards but it certainly broaden the
base of who could use computers I
actually looked at a at an Apple ad from
1978 it was a print ad that shows you
ancient and and it said thousands of
people have discovered the Apple
computer thousands of people and it also
said you don't want to buy one of these
computers where you put a cartridge in I
think that was a reference to eat one of
the Atari or something no you want a
computer you can write your own programs
on and so the world and obviously we had
simple yet some very strange ads back
then we had one where it was in a
kitchen and there was a woman that
looked like of the wife and she was
typing in recipes on the computer with
the husband looking on approvingly in
the back of like that how did that work
for you I don't think well so um but but
just think back to I I know that you
started Microsoft prior to 1977 you I
think Apple started the year before in
civics Microsoft in 74 was any vitamin e
babe
and then yeah then we did the bait ship
the basic in 75 okay most we will I some
people here but I don't think most
people know that there was actually a
some Microsoft software in that Apple 2
computer do you want to talk about what
happened there how that how that
occurred yeah the there'd been the
Altair and a few other companies
actually about 24 that had done
Varis machines but the 77 group included
the pet trs-80 Amador in the client via
Condor pet trs-80
in the Apple 2 the original Apple 2
basic the integer basic we had nothing
to do with but then there was a floating
point one where and I mostly worked with
walls on that I made let me tell this
story it was was my partner we started
out was guy who Steve Wozniak brilliant
brilliant guy he writes this basic that
is like the best basic on the planet it
does stuff that no other basics ever
done you don't have to run it to find
your error messages it finds them when
you type it in stuff it's perfect in
every way except for one thing which is
it's it's just fixed point right it's
not it's not floating point and so we're
getting a lot of input that people want
this basic to be floating point and like
what Bagan laws please please make this
floating pose we how many people are an
app will me yeah for beggin laws to make
this floating point and he just never
does it you know when he wrote it by
hand on paper I mean you know he didn't
we he didn't have an assembler or
anything to write it with it was all
just written on paper any typing in he
just never got around to making a by any
point well this is one of the mysteries
of life I don't know but he never did
and so you know Microsoft's have this
very popular really good floating-point
basic that we ended up going to them and
saying help and and how much was that I
think you were telling us her it was
$31,000 that Apple paid you for the
floating-point basic and I flew out to
Apple I spent two days there getting the
cassette the cassette tapes were the
main ways that people stored things at
the time I and you know that was fun I
think the most fun is is later when we
work together what was the most fun tell
tell the story about the most fun that
was later and maybe later not the most
fun let him talk amazing I'm T well
Steve can probably start it better that
the team that was assembled there to do
the Macintosh was a very committed team
and there was an equivalent team on our
side that just got totally focused on
this activity Jeff harbors a lot of
incredible people and we really abet our
future because we on the Macintosh being
successful and then hopefully graphics
interface in general being successful
but first and foremost the thing that
would popularize that being the Mac
and so we were working together the
schedules were uncertain quality was
uncertain the price when Steve first
came up it was going to be a lot cheaper
computer then it ended up being but that
was fine you worked in both places and
both well we were in Seattle and we fly
down but Microsoft if I remember
correctly from what I read
wasn't Microsoft one of the few
companies that were allowed to even have
a prototype of the back of the time
what's interesting what what what's hard
to remember now is that Microsoft wasn't
in the applications business then the
men they took a big bet on the Mac
because they this is how they got into
the apps business I mean Lotus dominated
the apps business on the PC back then
right we had done just MultiPlan it was
a hit on the Apple 2 and then Mitch did
an incredible job betting on the IBM PC
and 1-2-3 came in and you know ruled
that that part of business so the
question was what was the next paradigm
shift that would allow for an entry
WordPerfect we have word but WordPerfect
was by far the strongest more processing
debase in database and word was it what
that was a kind of a DOS a text all of
the all of these products I'm saying
more das based write products because
Windows wasn't in the picture at the
time that's more in the early 90s that
that we get to that and so we made this
bet that the parent time shift would be
graphics interface and particularly that
the Macintosh would make that happen
with 128k a memory 22 cabe which was for
the screen buffer 14 K was for the
operating system so it was 14 K yeah
the original Mac operating system was
14k 14k that we had to have loaded when
our software ran so when the shell would
come up it had all the 128 K the OS was
the OS was bigger than 14k it was in the
20s somewhere I think so when we ship
these now we ship these computers now
with you know gigabyte 2 gigabytes of
memory and and nobody remembers 128 K I
remember that I remember I remember
paying a lot of money for computers with
a hundred
okay in those days so the two companies
worked closely on on the Mac project
because because you were maybe not the
only but the principal or one of the
principal software creators for it right
is that right well Apple did the Mac
itself but we got we got Bill and his
team involved to write these
applications and we were doing a few
apps ourselves we did Mac Paint and Mac
draw and stuff like that but Bill and
his team did some great work now in
terms of going moving forward when after
you left and your company grew more and
more strong how did you what did you
think was going to happen to Apple after
sort of the disasters that occur after
Steve left well apples fate hung in the
balance we continued to do Macintosh
software and you know Excel which Steve
and I introduced together in New York
City that was kind of a fun event that
went on and did very well but then you
know met Apple just wasn't
differentiating itself well enough from
the higher volume platform and meaning
Windows right I mean Dawson windows okay
but especially Windows in the 90s began
to take off I 1995 windows became papa
the big debate wasn't sort of Mac versus
Windows the big debate was character
mode in her face versus graphics mode in
her face and when the 386 came and we
got more memory and the speed was out of
good and some development tools came
along that paradigm bet on GUI paid off
or everybody who'd gotten in early and
said you know this is the way that's
going to go and but Apple wasn't able to
leverage its they weren't you problems
they after the 512 K Mac was done the
product line just didn't evolve as fast
if Steve wasn't there as it needed to
and we were actually negotiating a deal
to invest and make some commitments on
things with Gil Amelio and
no seriously and we mean don't be mean
to him I'm sorry to saying the words go
Emilio you can see uh and so I was
calling him up on the weekend and all
this stuff and next thing I knew Steve
called me up and said don't worry about
that negotiation with Gil Amelio uh you
can just talk to me now and I said Wow
Gil was a nice guy but he had a saying
he said Apple is like a ship with a hole
in the bottom leaking water and my job
is to get the ship pointed in the right
direction okay so I meanwhile through
all this I mean I want to get back to
the thing we saw in 1997 at Macworld
there but windows was just going great
guns I mean windows 95 to whatever
extent earlier versions of Windows had
not had all the features all the gooey
stuff that the Mac had windows 95 really
was an enormous enormous leap yeah 95 is
when graphics interface became
mainstream and when the software
industry realized wow this is the way
applications are going to be done and it
was amazing that it was ridiculed sort
of in 93 94 was not mainstream and then
in 95 the debate was over it was kind of
just a common-sense thing and it was a
combination of hardware and software
maturity getting to a point that people
could see it so I don't want to go
through every detail the whole history
of how you came back but thank you you
had but you in that video we also you
said you had decided to that it was
destructive to have this competition
with Microsoft now obviously Apple was
in a lot of trouble and I presume that
there was some tactical or strategic
reason for that as well as just wanting
to be a nice guy right I mean you know
Apple was in very serious trouble
and what was really clear was that if
the game was a zero-sum game where for
Apple to win Microsoft had to lose then
Apple was going to lose but that's a lot
of people's heads were still in that
place why was that from your perspective
well a lot of people's heads were in
that place at Apple uh and even in the
customer base because you know applet
invented a lot of this stuff and
Microsoft was being successful and Apple
wasn't and there was jealousy and this
and that there was just a lot of reasons
for it that don't matter but the net
result of it was was there were too many
people at Apple and in the Apple
ecosystem playing the game of for Apple
to win Microsoft has to lose and it was
clear that you didn't have to play that
game cuz Apple wasn't gonna beat
Microsoft Apple didn't have to beat
Microsoft Apple had to remember who
Apple was because it forgotten who Apple
was and so to me it was pretty essential
to break that paradigm and it was it was
also important that you know Microsoft
was was the biggest software developer
outside of Apple developing for the Mac
and na so you know that was it was just
crazy what was happening at that time
and Apple was very weak and so I called
bill up and we tried to patch things up
and since that time we've had a team
that's fairly dedicated to doing the Mac
applications and they've always been
treated kind of in a unique way so that
they can have a pretty special
relationship with Apple and that's
worked out very well in fact every
couple years or so there's been
something new that we've been able to do
on the Mac and oh great great business
for us and and it's actually the
relationship between the Mac development
team at Microsoft and Apple is a great
relationship it's one of our best
developer relationships and do you look
at yourself as rivals now today as the
landscape has evolved and we'll talk
about the internet landscape and
everything else and other companies that
have come before but how do you look at
yourselves in this landscape today cuz
you I mean you you are competitors in
certain ways we watch the American Way
right the commercials and you get
annoyed at each other from genuine I
have to confess I like PC guy yeah he's
great
I am you know the thing part of those
you know the art of those commercials is
not to be mean but it's actually for the
guys to like each other
thanks pc guys pc guys great
I liked not a big part
his mother loves him his mother lies hi
mom
I like PC guy totally Wow is endearing
the other guy you see guys what makes it
all work
actually yeah all right it's worth
thinking about it so how do you look at
me let me just ask you Bill
you obviously Microsoft is a much larger
company here in many more markets many
more types of products than then Apple
is you know when you were running the
company or when Steve Ballmer is running
the company
you think obviously about Google you
think about I don't know Linux in the in
the in the enterprise you think about
lots of I mean Sony within the game area
how often is Apple on your radar screen
at Microsoft in a business sense well
they're they're only a radar screen as
an opportunity and in a few cases like
the zoom that if you go over to that
group they think of Apple as a
competitor they love the fact that
apples created a gigantic market and
they're going to try and come in and
contribute something to that that and
and we love them cuz they're all
customers
I have to tell you I was actually told
by Jay Allen I'm serious that because of
the nature of the processor the
development platform they used to
develop a lot of the software for the
Xbox 360 was Macs and he claimed that at
one point they had like placed the
biggest order for whatever the Mac Tower
was at the time of anybody and it was
Microsoft I don't know it was the
biggest but yeah we had a the same
processor essentially that the Mac had
is one of those great ironies they were
switching away from that processor while
the Xbox 360 was adopting it but for
good reasons actually in both cases
because we're not in a portable
application and that was one of the
things that that process a road map
didn't have but yes we did it chose
pragmatism but we would try and do
things that way so that was the
development system for the early people
getting their software ready for the
introduction of of Xbox 360 and we never
ran an add-on that I see admirable
restraint as what there were hundreds of
them Steve is so known for his restraint
um how do you look at Microsoft from an
Apple perspective I mean you compete in
computers and I mean you could say you
don't compete you know the era of
destructive whatever we that whatever
you said in 1997 but you think you're
consciously aware of what they're doing
with you know if you followed this too
closely I think what's what's really
interesting is and we talked about this
earlier today if you if you look at the
reason that the iPod exists and that
Apple's in that marketplace it's because
these really great Japanese consumer
electronics companies who kind of owned
the portable music market for a long
long invented it and owned it couldn't
rights couldn't do the appropriate
software couldn't conceive of and
implement the appropriate software
because an iPod is really just software
software in the iPod itself it's
software on the PC of the Mac and it's
software in the cloud for the store and
it's a
beautiful box but it's software if you
look at what a Mac is it's its OS 10
writes in a beautiful box but it's it's
OS 10 and if you look at what an iPhone
will hopefully be its software and so
the big secret about Apple of course is
not so big secret maybe is that Apple
views itself as a software company and
there aren't very many software
companies left and Microsoft is a
software company and so you know we look
at what they do and and we think some
it's really great we think some of it's
a little bit of its competitive and most
of its not you know we we don't have a
belief that the Mac is going to take
over 80% of the PC market you know we're
really happy when our market share goes
up a point and we love that we work real
hard at it but apples fundamentally a
software company and there's not a lot
of us left in Microsoft's while you may
be fundamentally software company but
you've been known at least to your
customers into most journalists is the
company that kind of pays a lot of
attention integrating software and
hardware
you know Allen Microsoft has made some
recent moves to be a little more like
that obviously not in your core biggest
businesses but with Xbox and Zune and
you know the surface computing device we
saw today is another example these
aren't markets that hold up in size to
Windows or office but there are some of
your more recent initiatives are are the
company's approaches to this Alan Kay
had ridging a little or Alan Kay had a
great quote back in the 70s I think he
said people that love software want to
do their own Hardware you know well
build up software you know I can resist
that the question is are there markets
where the innovation and variety you get
is a net positive the negative is that
in the early stage you really want to do
the two together so you want to do
prototyping and things like that you
know really is one thing and then take
the phone market we think we're on a
hundred and forty different kinds of
hardware we think it's beneficial to us
that even if we did a few
our selves would give us what we have
through those partnerships likewise if
you take the robotics market very
undeveloped we have over 140 all tiny
volume robots using Microsoft software
and the creativity building toys
security things medical things we love
the innovation and the ecosystem that's
going to grow up
who knows when we're patient around that
and we'll have a a great asset with this
robotic software platform so there are
things like PC foam and robot were I the
Microsoft choice is to go for the
variety it's apples it's great there you
know for them they do what works super
well for them and there's a few markets
like Xbox 360 Zune and this year we have
two new ones the surface thing and this
roundtable which is the meeting room
thing we're will actually through
subcontractors but it's our the PNL on
the risk and all that for the hardware
the design is is completely a Microsoft
thing the the round table is that
something even now store were you just
we've shown prototypes of it it's that's
the thing where it's got the 360-degree
all right and all those it's like cisco
has something in that market and HP to
write or HP has a very high-end thing
that's a tiny bit like it but anyway all
right you know you ever regret it was
there something you might have wanted to
do differently and maybe this all you
feel like this happened after you left
Apple something you might have done
differently that we're where you could
have had a much bigger market share for
the Mac well before I answer that let me
make a comment on Bill's answer there
which is it's very interesting in the
consumer market and the enterprise
market they're they're very different
spaces and in the consumer market at
least I think one can make a pretty
strong case that outside of Windows on
PCs it's hard to see other examples of
the software and
hardware being decoupled working super
well yet it might in a phone space over
time it might but it's not clear it's
not clear you can see a lot more
examples of the hardware software
coupling working well and so I think
this is this is one of the reasons we
all you know come to work everyday is
because nobody knows the answer to some
of these questions and we'll find out
over the coming years maybe both will
work fine yeah and maybe they won't yeah
it's good and it's good to try both
approaches and some product categories
take music players this the solo design
worked better in the PC market the
variety of designs at this stage has a
higher share and as a higher share yeah
it has a lot higher J well it's not that
much different music players the other
way around
um is there some moment you feel like I
should have done this or Apple should
have done that and we could have had oh
it's not this idea of these hardware
software integration and it's working
very well now there's a lot of things
that happens that I'm sure I could have
done better when I was at Apple the
first time and a lot of things that
happened after I left that I thought
were wrong turns but it doesn't matter
it really doesn't matter and you kind of
gotta let go of that stuff and you know
we are where we are so we tend to look
forward and you know one of the things I
did when I got back to Apple 10 years
ago was I I gave the museum to Stanford
and all the papers and all the old
machines and kind of cleared out the
cobwebs and said let's stop looking
backwards here it's all about what
happens tomorrow and yeah because you
can't you can't look back and say well
gosh you know I wish I hadn't gotten
fired I wish I was there I wish this I
wish that it doesn't matter and so let's
go invent tomorrow rather than worrying
about what happened to yesterday let's
talk about we're gonna talk a little bit
tomorrow but let's or about today the
landscape of how you see the different
players in the market and how you you
look at what's developing now what is
surprised both of you since having been
around for so long and still very active
in everything I mean your companies are
still critically key companies but there
are many many companies that are
becoming quite powerful how do you look
at the landscape at this moment and
what's happening especially in the
internet space I think it's super
healthy right now I think there's a lot
of
a lot of young people out there building
some great companies who want to build
companies who aren't just interested in
starting something and selling it to one
of the big guys but you want to build
companies and I think there's some some
really exciting companies getting built
out there some next-generation of stuff
that that you know some of us play
catch-up with and and you know some of
us find ways to partner with and things
like that but there's a lot of activity
out there now wouldn't you say yeah I'd
say it's a healthy period the the notion
of what the new form factors look like
what natural interface can do the
ability to use the cloud the internet to
do part of the task in a complementary
way to the local experience there's a
lot of invention that the whole approach
of startups the existing companies who
do research it will look back at this as
one of the great periods of invention I
think so too there's a lot of things
that that are that are risky right now
which is always a good sign you know and
you can see through them you can see to
the other side and go yes this could be
huge but there's a period of risk that
you know nobody's ever done it before an
example that would it Briggs is I do but
I can't say and so but but I can't say
when you feel like that that's a great
thing that's what keeps you coming to
work in the morning and it's and it
tells you there's something exciting
around the next corner okay but so the
two of you have certainly you're
involved every day with the internet you
have internet products you have a whole
slew of stuff on the internet you have
iTunes and dotmac and and and all of
that but on another level
you're the guys who represent the rich
client the personal computer the you
know big operating system and all that
and there is a certain school of thought
and I'm sure it's shared by some people
in the room that this is all migrating
to the cloud and you'll need a fairly
light piece of hardware that won't have
to have all that investment all the kind
of stuff you guys have done throughout
your careers so as much as people I
think of you as rivals one way to think
of you is the two guys dinosaurs
we're both dinosaurs you're whatever I
can talk about that now
seriously is there any in five years in
five years is the personal computer
still going to be the linchpin of all
this stuff well you can say that it'll
be predicted that it won't be you know
the network computer took us over about
what five years ago we disappeared
remember the single function computer
there was somebody who said that these
general-purpose things are K and M idea
so that's because we're the mainstream
is always under attack the thing that
people don't realize is that you're
going to have rich local functionality I
mean at least our bet where you get
things like speech and vision as you get
more natural form factors it's a
question of using that local richness
together with the richness that's that's
elsewhere and if you look at the device
say that's connecting to the TV set or
connecting in the car there are lighter
weight Hardware internet connections but
when you come to the full screen rich
you know edit the document create things
and I think we're nowhere near where we
can be on making that stronger I'll give
you a concrete example I love Google
Maps use it on my computer you know in a
browser but when we were doing the
iPhone we thought wouldn't be great to
have maps on the iPhone and so we called
up Google and they had some they done a
few client apps in Java on some phones
and an API that we worked with them a
little on and we ended up writing a
client app for those api's they would
provide the back-end service and the app
we were able to write since we're pretty
reasonable writing apps blows away any
Google Maps client just blows it away
same set of data coming off the server
but the experience you have using it is
unbelievably better than the computer
and and just in a completely different
league than what they put on phones
before and you know that client is is
the result of a lot of technology on the
client that client application so when
we show it to them there they're just
blown away by how good it is
and you can't do that stuff in a browser
so people are figuring out how to do
more in a browser how to get persistent
state of things when you're disconnected
from a browser how do you actually run
apps locally using you know apps written
in those technologies so they can be
pretty transparent whether you're
connected or not but it's happening
fairly slowly and there's still a lot
you can do with a rich client
environment at the same time the
hardware is progressing to where you can
run a rich client environment on lower
and lower cost devices on lower and
lower powered devices and so there are
some pretty cool things you can do with
clients so are okay so you're saying
rich clients still matter but maybe I
misunderstood you but your example was
about a rich client that is not a
personal computer as we have thought of
a person what I'm trying to say is it's
I think the marriage of some really
great client apps with some really great
cloud services is incredibly powerful
and right now can be way more powerful
than just having a browser on the client
you're talking about a software company
being a software and services company
rather than a I'm saying the marriage of
these services plus a more sophisticated
client is a very powerful marriage
billion architecture that quickly the
question is do you run just in the cloud
and all you have down locally is the
browser and it that is the same question
for the phone as it is for the
fullscreen device they'll always be
different screen sizes because these are
you know the eight the the five-inch
screen does not really compete with the
20 inch screen does not compete with the
big living room screen those are things
that there'll be some type of computing
behind all of those things all connected
to the Internet but the idea that
locally you have the responsiveness
immediate interaction without the
latency or bandwidth limitations that
you get if you try and do it all all
behind me that's what leads to the right
balance what does that device look like
in five years what would you be your
principal device is it one or is it is
it it I think you use I could be wrong I
think you carry a tablet right you're
right which has not necessarily stormed
the world yet yeah this is like Windows
- 90 - I think that is unrepentant on my
belief okay but to go back to Karis
point what would you each imagine that
you would carry as your principal let's
say thing to do walking showed a very
light emailing all I coach did yes I
don't know if you guys saw but Jeff
Hawkins showed a linux-based a very
small kind of he call I think he called
it a companion to a smartphone today the
phone companion it sounded a little
naughty frankly it doesn't matter
weren't there but um what would you
think you got you would be I assume you
carry you carry tablet PC I don't know
what brand it is maybe you change them
up I don't know
you obviously carry a MacBook Pro I
would guess or yeah well in an iPhone
and an iPhone you have one I do right
here yes he has when he took it out
before what
really flashed his iPhone earlier today
good so what was your Dubai what what uh
what's your device in five years that
you rely on the most
I don't think you'll have one device I
think you'll have a full screen device
that you can carry around and you'll do
dramatically more reading nights off of
that yeah I mean I believe in the tablet
form factor I think you'll have voice I
think they have Inc you'll have some way
of having a hardware keyboard in some
settings for that and then you'll have
the device that fits in your pocket
which the whole notion of how much
function how much function should you
combine in there you know there's
navigation computers there's media
there's foam technologies letting us put
more things in there but then again you
really want to tune it so people know
what they expect so there's quite a bit
of experimentation in that pocket-sized
device but I think those are natural
form factors then it will have the
evolution of the portable machine and
the evolution of the phone we'll both be
extremely high volume complimentary that
is if you own one you're more likely to
own the other and then it home.you to
have a setup that they all plug into
well home you'll have your living room
which is your 10-foot experience and
that's connected up to the Internet and
there you'll have gaming and
entertainment and there's a lot of
experimentation in terms of what content
looks like in that world and then in
your den you'll have something a lot
like you have at your desk at work you
know the view is that every horizontal
and vertical surface will have a
projector so you can put information you
know your desk can be a surface that you
can sit and manipulate then I please
have a room in my house that doesn't
have a screen and a projector in it you
bet
Thanks the bathroom oh that's the
perfect place for it actually so what's
your five-year outlook at the devices
you'll carry you know it's interesting
the PC has proved to be very resilient
because as bill said earlier I mean the
death of the PC has been predicted every
few years here when you're saying PC you
mean personal computer in general not
just Windows PCs I mean personal
computer in general
and and you know there was the age of
productivity if you will you know the
spreadsheets and word processors and
that kind of got the whole industry
moving and it kind of plateaued for a
while was getting a little stale
then the internet came along right and
everybody needed more powerful computers
to get on the internet browsers came
along and it was this whole internet age
that came along access to the internet
and and then some number years ago you
could start to see that the PC that was
taken for granted things that kind of
plateaued a little bit and innovation
wise at least and then I think this
whole notion of the PC we called it the
digital hub but you call any you want
sort of a multimedia center of the house
started to take off with digital cameras
and digital camcorders and sharing
things over the internet and kind of
needing a repository for all that stuff
and it was reborn again as sort of the
hub of your digital life and you can
sort of see that there's something
starting again it's not clear exactly
what it is but it will be the PC maybe
used a little more tightly coupled with
some back-end internet services and some
things like that and of course pcs are
going mobile in an ever greater degree
so I think the PC is going to continue
this general-purpose device is going to
continue to be with us and morph with us
whether it's a tablet or a notebook or a
you know big curved desktop that you
have at your house or whatever it might
be so I think that'll be something that
most people have at least in this
society and others maybe not but
certainly in this one but then there's
an explosion
that's starting to happen in these what
you call post-pc devices right you call
the iPod one of them there's a lot of
things that are not and get into trouble
for using that term I want you to know
that what I'm kidding post-pc devices
why people could people write letters to
the editor they complain about it anyway
going okay well anyway I think there's
just a category of devices that aren't
as general-purpose that aren't that that
are they're really more focused on
specific functions whether they're
phones or iPods or zooms or
what-have-you and I think that category
devices is starting is going to continue
to to be very innovative and we're gonna
see lots of meaning an example of what
it would
me well an iPod is opposed pleum as a
phone as a post-pc devices B is the
iPhone and are some of these other
smartphones and I know you make you
believe that the iPhone is much better
than these other smart phones at the
moment but is the are these things
aren't they really just computers in a
different form factor I mean we say we
phone it sounds like we're getting the
point where everything is a computer in
a different form factor so so what right
so what if it's built with a computer
inside it it doesn't matter it's what is
it how do you use it and how does the
consumer approach it and and so who
cares what's inside it anymore what are
the core functions of the device
formerly known as the cell phone
whatever we want to call it the pocket
device what would you say the core
functions like five years out what are
the core functions of that pocket device
how quickly all these things that have
been somewhat specialized the navigation
device the digital wallet the phone the
camera the video camera how quickly
those all come together it's hard to
chart out but eventually you'll be able
to pick something that has the
capability to do every one of those
things and yet given the small size you
still won't want to edit your homework
or edit a movie on the screen of that
size and so you'll have something else
that lets you do the reading and editing
and those things now if we could ever
get a screen that would just roll out
like a scroll and then you might be able
to have the device that did everything
you know in the very first D conference
we had these guys from e Inc here I'm
sure you both talked to them they were
talking about that that was five years
ago it's always five years out do you do
you as we can there's some advances in
projection technology that are more
likely deliver it I think than the
flexible material guys but it's not even
on the horizon no matter which of the
two approaches any part person we have
some Microsoft Research people work on
that there's there's a lot of investment
but it's at least in the five-year time
frame you five years from now what's
going to be on that pocket to buy
I don't know and the reason I don't know
is because I wouldn't have thought that
there would have been maps on it five
years ago but something comes along gets
really popular people love it get used
to it you want it on there so people are
inventing things constantly and I think
the art of it is is balancing what's on
there and what's not on there is the
editing function and clearly most things
you carry with you or communications
devices you want to do some
entertainment with them as well but
they're primarily communications devices
and they're going to that's what they're
going to be outside the computing area
where the exciting areas in the internet
space at all that you're looking at that
you find that that's interesting to each
of your companies and in general for for
you any kind of social networking any
kind of the wikis those kind of things
things we've talked about past couple mm
today essentially you know we're working
on some things that I can't talk about
again again yeah but there is very
beautiful or used to be a saying isn't
it that out of blow us away though I am
Wow it's there used to be a saying at
Apple isn't it funny a ship that leaks
from the top so uh
yeah yeah that's kind of like a sweater
without sleeves as a vest I don't get
that that was what they used to say
about me when I was in my 20
the there's a zillion interesting things
going on on the internet that the most
interesting things to me are these
incredible new services that people are
bringing up and rounding entertainment
or uh there's a lot of them surrounding
entertainment but there's a lot of them
that have to do with just sort of
figuring out how to navigate through
life a little more efficiently and I
think you know it's really great when
you show somebody something and you
don't have to convince them they have a
problem that this solves they know they
have a problem you can show them
something oh my god
I need this and I think you're going to
see a lot of things like that happen
over the next year or two do you you
obviously have a very large internet
business with iTunes and and you sell a
lot of stuff on the in the Apple Store
but you know you were early with this
idea that when you bought a computer
from Apple you had this kind of Internet
service back-end and was called dot Mac
and I think a lot of people feel it you
haven't developed it very I couldn't
agree with you more and will make up for
lost time in the near future and in your
case you obviously have huge things like
like hotmail for instance which is I
guess it and M Windows Messenger which
are both widely used and I don't even
know how many users gazillion huge
numbers but on the other hand you
haven't as Steve Ballmer was talking
about today you know you have other
people have much stronger positions and
things like search and other parts of
the of the internet so are you guys
because you are the personal computer
companies that are best you know best
associated with that not as nimble as
some of these competitors at this point
if you worry about not being as nimble
both of you I mean obviously Microsoft's
a much bigger company but you're a big
company a Steve Apple is do you worry
about not being as nimble as some but
he's sitting out there with you know the
kind of 10 employees that you guys add
in
1977 well there's always going to be
great new things that come out of other
companies and you want to be in a
position to benefit from those to have
those inventions drive demand for
Windows and personal computers and then
some of those upstream things you want
to participate in
I hope Steve mentioned we are going to
participate in search hopefully to a
higher degree and the future dimension
then at present so we'll we'll see what
we can do there a lot of the
applications are more specialized
they're not areas we'll go into you know
take what can happen with education now
that video is mainstream and all these
tools that let you do rich interactions
are very mainstream I'm very excited
about that
you know the idea of empowerment goes
back to the very beginning of our
industry and some of those dreams that
this would be used by students or that
teachers could get better and learn from
each other in these new ways we've just
at the threshold where some of those
things can happen and yes our companies
can contribute to that but as a whole
it's the ecosystem jumping on and
building on each other where you can
finally say finally technology did
something for education see I I look at
this a little bit differently which is
we're not trying to do a lot of this
stuff because it's not what we do we
don't think one company can do
everything so you've got to partner with
people that are really good at stuff
like we're not I mean maybe Microsoft is
great at search we're not we're not
trying to be great at search so we
partner with people that are great at
search and we don't know how to do maps
on the backend we know how to do a great
the best Maps client in the world but we
don't know how to do the backend
so we partner with people that know how
to do the backend and what we want to do
is be that that consumers device and
that consumers experience wrapped around
all this information and things we can
deliver to them in a wonderful user
interface in a coherent product and so
in some cases you know we have to do
more work than others you know in the
case of iTunes
there wasn't a music delivery service it
was any good we had to do one so we'll
do one but
other cases there's companies doing a
way better job because we're not as good
at this stuff as other people are and
we'd love to partner with them and so
you know we selectively do that and I
think it's it's really hard for one
company to do everything it's time an
interview what you're both in
entertaining the entertain year-old in
terms important to both your companies
for yours music right now and as you get
into Apple TV Microsoft has been within
the Hollywood area where do you see that
going in the era of YouTube we've had a
couple of network people here talking
about changes that are happening in
Hollywood and everything else what is
happening now to entertain my delivery
where do you all play because you'll be
the delivery mechanism in one way or the
other for most people well the big the
big milestone is where the delivery
platform is the Internet and so you
bring the richness and the interactivity
I think you can get a little bit of a
glimpse of the future of TV more from
looking at community type things like
Xbox Live where people are talking to
each other finding friends you know
watching things together talking about
those things that if you map that onto
genres like educational shows or sports
shows or watching the Olympics of the
elections that ability to navigate
becomes very very powerful and we're not
an entertainment company yes we do halo
which is this big video game but by and
large we're a platform and so it's the
it's the top software things whether
it's the speech or the ink or the deep
graphics that's where things that take
10 years to get done the IPTV stuff the
foundation there you know it took 10
years to get it done now it's finally
coming to fruition and we have people
like AT&T betting their company on
putting that together so we're just at
the start of having a a scale
entertainment delivery vehicle through
both through pcs unfortunately not
connected up to the TV set in most cases
but that's a point of innovation and now
things like IPTV and an Xbox that are
connected up
the living room Steve you were today
Billy weren't here but Steve showed a
new function of Apple TV that brings
YouTube directly to the TV is there
going to be more of that from you do you
see yourself the way Bill says is an
enabler of entertainment or well I mean
putting aside your Disney role but
you're at I mean I think I think people
want to enjoy their entertainment when
they want it and how they want it on the
device that they want it on so
ultimately that's going to drive the
entertainment companies into all sorts
of different business models and that's
a good thing I mean if you're a Content
company that's a great thing more people
wanting to you know enjoy your content
more often in more different ways that's
that's why you're in business but the
transitions are hard sometimes and you
know the music industry it turned out
that the internet got fast enough to
download songs pretty easily there was
no legal alternatives and and maybe they
made some bad choices and how they
reacted to that but you know they're
still trying to make the transition to a
very different way of doing business or
ways of doing business while they're
under attack from piracy and we can all
highlight some of the mistakes that have
been made but you know still it's a
tough job and a Hollywood I think you
know is watched what's happened in music
learn some things to do some things not
to do but you know they're still trying
to map this out how do they make some of
these transitions some new business
models different platforms allowing
their their customers way more freedom
on when they want to watch stuff and how
they want to watch it and I think
there's a tremendous amount of
experimentation and thought going on
that's going to be good it's going to be
really good if you're a content owner
can I ask about the user interface of
the personal computer for a minute Vista
has just come out which is your best
version windows you've done has some UI
improvements in it you're about to do
yet another version of the Mac OS called
Leopard and in the fall which from what
you've shown publicly at least so far
has it has some improvements but
fundamentally these are still the kind
of file icon
folder icon drop-down menu I know I'm
minimizing there's a lot of other things
there's gadgets and widgets and all
kinds of other cool things in there now
but it you know there you can see that
it's still all built on what you started
with
what Xerox did research on is there a in
the offing in the next four or five
years is it possible there's a new
paradigm for organizing the user
interface of the personal computer let's
leave cellphones and things out for a
minute but just the personal computer
bill one of the things that's been
anticipated for a long time is when 3d
comes into that interface and there was
a lot of experimentation sites on the
internet where you'd kind of walk around
and meet people but in fact the richness
the speed it just didn't sustain itself
now we're starting to see with some of
the mapping stuff a few of the sites
that the quality of that graphics the
tools and things are getting to the
point where 3d can really come in so I
definitely say that when you go to a
store book store you'll be able to see
the books lined up you know the way you
might be interested in or lined up the
way they are in the real store so 3d is
a way of organizing things particularly
as we're getting much more media
information on the computer a lot more
choices a lot more navigation than we've
ever had before and we can take that
into this communications world where the
PC is playing a much more central role
kind of taking over what that was the
PBX sort of one of the last mainframes
in the business environment
that'll be a big change that'll come to
it and as we get natural input that will
cause a change and what about this
multi-touch stuff it's really
interesting
obviously Steve showed some of it on the
on the iPhone when he introduced the
iPhone Steve Ballmer
today showed a bunch of it with the
surface computing device it happens
although it's not part of our program
that HP which is a sponsor of this
conference has a multi-touch sort of
display over here out in the foyer is
this will this make its way and already
report this kind of thing yeah will this
make its way into let you call it direct
of objects with your hands and your
fingers will this make its way into
mainstream let's say laptop computers as
a new UI or an additional part of the UI
or is that just a well but you go beyond
the lash lies devices his vision
software is doing vision and so you know
imagine a game machine where you just
can pick up the bat and swing it or the
tennis racket the swinger we have a yes
we know know that well that's we got it
you can't pick up your 1000 you have to
I see what you mean swing it you can't
sit there with your friends and do those
natural things that's a 3d positional
device
this is video recognition this is a
camera seeing what's going on and you
know in a meeting like you're on a video
conference you don't know who's speaking
when they're audio only things like that
the camera will be ubiquitous now of
course we have to design way the
people's expectations about privacy are
handled appropriately but software can
do vision it can do it very very
inexpensively and that means this stuff
becomes pervasive you don't just talk
about it being in a laptop device you
talked about it being part of the
meeting room or the living room or but
on the laptop the way that and and you
know maybe I'm wrong maybe this is what
we have is great and we don't need any
new big radical change but when I turn
on my laptop whether it's my Vista
laptop or my Mac laptop you know it's
it's kind of been improvements but it's
a lot like it was 10 years ago it's much
better the graphics are better and all
that you talked about that radical you
know you have the mouse for both you're
come have the icons you move around you
have but I mean and you talked about
what a big gamble it was in 84 to do
that and then follow on with with
Windows we still essentially have that
approach and I'm just wondering is that
going to change a touch ink speech
vision those things come in but they
don't come in as a radical substitute I
think you're also under estimating the
degree of evolution because you've lived
with it year by year you know say we'd
sent you away for 10 years and you came
back and said wow there's a search
paradigm and that's more at the center
of how you find these things
there's tagging that's more of the
center
how you find these things there's you
know the evolution is a very good thing
in fact even in that evolution the stuff
we did with office you there's this
balance you strike where when you make a
change and this that case the ribbon
you're going to have some users who feel
like oh geez I have to spend a little
bit time to be brought along to that you
know as but there has been good
evolution but these natural interface
things are the revolutionary change and
they'll be very revolutionary that
together with a 3d that I talked about
Steve I know you're working on something
it's gonna be beautiful we'll see it
yeah you know I can't talk about it but
the bill discusses all his secret plans
you don't have to miss anything I know
it's not fair but it's some I think the
question of the question is a very
simple one which is how much of the
really revolutionary things people are
going to do in the next five years are
done on the PCs or how much of it is
really focused on the post-pc devices
and there's a real temptation to focus
it on the post-pc devices because it's a
clean slate and because there are more
focused devices and because they don't
have you know they don't have the legacy
of these zillions of apps that have to
run in zillions of markets and so I
think there's going to be tremendous
revolution in the in the you know and
the experiences of the post-pc devices
and the question is how much to do in
the PCs and I think I'm sure Microsoft
is we're working on some really cool
stuff but some of it has to be tempered
a little bit because you do have you
know these tens of millions in our case
or hundreds of millions in bills case
users that are familiar with something
that you know they don't want a car with
six wheels they like a car with four
wheels they don't want to drive with a
with a with a with a joystick they like
the steering wheel and so you know you
have to as bill was saying in some cases
you have to augment what exists there
and in some cases you can replace things
but I think the radical rethinking of
things is going to happen in a lot of
these post-pc devices
okay I'm gonna ask it more personal
question you we have a just a minute
before we were gonna open up for
questions what's the greatest I'm not
gonna call this the Barbara Walters
moment and ask you what Reid like to be
but what you would love to be Bevan
Walters let me just tell you no I would
not
what's the greatest misunderstanding
dang right but thank you Steve
about your relationship I mean you're
obviously going to go down in history is
history books already said kind of thing
but what's the greatest misunderstand
between your in your relationship and
about each other what would you say
would be this idea of catfight this idea
of what which one of the many we've kept
our marriage secret for over a decade
now Canada that trip to Canada
was there I don't think either of us
have anything to complain about in
general and I know that the the projects
like the Mac project you know was just
an incredible thing a fun thing where we
were taking a risk we did look a lot
younger in that video you did you look
12 and that's what I try and was 12 but
no it's been fun to work together I
actually kind of miss some of the people
aren't around anymore you know people
come and go in this industry it's nice
when somebody sticks around and they
have some context of all the things that
it were to not work and the industry
gets all we're all crazy about some new
thing you know like you know the the
there's always this paradigm of the
company that successful is going to go
away and stuff like that it's nice to
have people seeing the waves and waves
of that and yet been willing when it
when it counted to take the risk to
bring in something new
has it been imported one last question
and then we'll we'll go to the audio not
even answers because he just said I
don't answer that is secret game okay
yes I thought that was your answer that
wasn't my answer you know when Bill and
I first met each other and worked
together in the early days generally we
were both the youngest guys in the room
right individually or together I'm about
six months older than he is but roughly
the same age and now when we're working
at our respective companies I know about
you but I'm the oldest guy in the room
most of the time and that's why I love
being here
so happy to oblige happy to oblige and
uh you know I think of I think if most
things in life is either a Bob Dylan or
Beatle song but there's that that one
line and that one Beatle song you and I
have memories longer than the road that
stretches out ahead and that's that's
clearly true here at well you know what
I think we should end it there let's
just end it there I'm a little T right
here thank you thank you very much
Oh
coilette
whoa
Wow
okay so on some audience questions
questions can we have the lights
Roger man Roger from elevation partners
hey guys that was that was incredible
thank you very much
we've got a big election coming up next
year I'm curious if there are any issues
that you see in Silicon Valley that we
all ought to be focused on communicating
effectively to the next potential
president in United States that is any
common ground that we share because it's
weird you don't actually hear any issues
that people are talking about right now
I'm curious if you guys have any in mind
yeah well certainly education is one
that I put at the top of the list
I you know is are there technological
solutions right now that they could do
something about or is that just sort of
like now that the proper technology is
going to be helpful and more and more
but the way that teachers are measured
and and made excellence the way that the
high schools are designed the
expectations they have it's it's not
just a pure technology thing it's more
an institutional practice where the
opportunity is and you know there should
be a lot of debate about the different
ways of doing that Steve boy we've got
some pretty big problems and I think
most of them are much bigger than
anything Silicon Valley can contribute
right now to solve so hopefully some of
those will get solved I also think we
underestimate how much all of our
industry depends on stability we've
enjoyed it you know long period of
stability and we've been able to focus
on on technology and growing our
businesses and stuff and and I think we
take that for granted sometimes one of
the more interesting areas that we all
suffer from of course is in the area of
energy dependence and there's a lot of
work going on I know a lot of investing
going on anyway I don't know if the
results are there but a lot of investing
going on in in alternative energy and
maybe maybe Silicon Valley can play a
small role in some of that stuff
you guys investing in anything
personally some which might be a lot a
billion here there are you investing in
that area no we're just a pre okay yeah
just appreciating over there hi Donna
cleanse Sony Pictures my question is
really at what point is there too much
diversity it was talked about a few
times in the discussion the fact that
now
micro processors are very low cost
memories low cost software is is vic wa
tiss but you know my life has been made
better by standards like coding
standards network standards and it seems
like we're reaching a point where
diversity is starting to to take hold to
a point where we're not going to be able
to have the kinds of convergence devices
that i think everyone would really be
able to appreciate and i'm wondering you
know is this going to be like like
health care or mass transit where you
just can never put it back on the bottle
again and I'd like to get your
perspective on that if there's still an
opportunity to have some grand
convergence devices that can really
simplify people's lives and enrich their
lives speak well I think bill and I
would agree that we can get it down to
two no I think there's a it's hard to
it's hard to limit imagination and
innovation I think there's always going
to be a bunch of new great things but
and I think that's part of what we put
up with to get the innovation we put up
with a little bit of aggravation to get
the innovation and I think the
marketplace is awfully good at allowing
diversity when it should and then
getting rid of it when it shouldn't I
mean and then letting it come back
sometimes yeah
yeah I mean in terms of standards and
things they need there's a the internet
standards have been incredibly powerful
you know video formats things like this
and so I I don't see things that are
going to really hold back a convergence
device you know sure there's a lot
Wireless approaches but that's pretty
healthy right now they each have various
merits a few of them will end up
overlapping the other ones and kill the
other ones out but well I think the
industry's done very well at latching on
standards for the things that there were
no longer any innovation in and then
focusing on the places where the it
wasn't clear which approach was was
passed hi Jesse I'm Jesse Kornbluth head
butler comm because you're not the
youngest guys in the room anymore
it's perhaps appropriate to ask you a
question about legacy each of you bill
even your harshest critic would have to
admit that your philanthropy work is you
know planet shaking incredible and could
be if you make it a second act so
amazing that it would dwarf what you've
actually done at Microsoft
if you had to choose a legacy what would
it be and Steve do you look at Bill and
you think gee that guy is so lucky he
had a company so rich with talent that
he didn't have to personally you know
come in every day and and save it and
you know I wish I had the opportunity I
can answer that way well the most
important work I got a chance to be
involved in no matter what I do is the
personal computer you know that's what I
grew up into my teens by 20s my 30s you
know I even knew not to get married
because I was so until later because I
was so obsessed with it that's my life's
work and I it's lucky for me that some
of the skill skills and resources that I
put skills first that I was able to
develop through those experiences can be
applied to the benefit of the the people
who haven't had technology including
medicine working for them so it's an
incredible blessing to have to things
like that but the thing that all you
know might if you look at my brain it's
filled with software and you know the
magic of software and a bleep in
software and you know that that's not
going to change so your question was
about whether I wish I didn't have to go
into Apple every day
you know if you if you envy bill a bit
the second act that he has oh no I think
it's grilled thing else I think the
world's a better place because bill
realized that his goal isn't to be the
richest guy in the cemetery
right that's a good thing and so he's
doing a lot of good with the money that
he made you know I'm sure bill was was
like me in this way I mean I grew up
fairly middle class lower middle class
and and and I never really cared much
about money and Apple was so successful
early on in life that I I was very lucky
that I didn't have to care about money
then and so I've been able to focus on
work and then later on my family and I
sort of look at us as to the luckiest
guys in the planet because we found what
we loved to do and we were at the right
place at the right time and we've gotten
to go to work every day with
super-bright people for 30 years and and
do what we love doing and so it's hard
to be happier than that you know that
your family and that what more can you
ask for and so I don't think about
legacy much I just think about being
able to get up every day and go in and
hang around these great people and
hopefully create something that other
people will love as much as we do and if
we can do that that's that's that's
great yeah like Stephenville Rob Kelley
I'm here with my business partner we've
got a hundred person internet media
business I'm wondering what would be the
single most valuable piece of advice you
give us to even attempt to create some
of the value that you guys have done in
both your very impressive companies I
think actually it may be in both cases
correct me if I'm wrong the the
excitement wasn't really seeing the
economic value you know even when we
wrote down at Microsoft in 1975 the
computer on every desk in every home we
didn't realize oh we'll have to be a big
company every time I thought oh god can
we double in size jeez can you manage
that many people will that feel fun
still you know and so every doubling was
like okay this is the last one and so
the economic thing wasn't for at the
forefront the the idea of being at the
forefront and see new things and things
we wanted to do and bringing in being
able to bring in different people who
are fun to work with eventually with a
pretty broad set of skills and figuring
out how to get those people those broad
skills to work well together has been
one of the greatest challenges you know
I've made more of my mistakes in that
area maybe then than any anywhere but
you know eventually getting some of
those teams to work very well together
so it's I think it's a lot about the
people and the the passion and it's
amazing that the business worked out the
way that it did yeah people say you you
have to have a lot of passion for what
you're doing and it's totally true and
the reason is is because it's so hard
that if you don't any rational person
would give up it's really hard and you
have to do it over a sustained period of
time so if you don't love it if you're
not having fun doing it you don't really
love it you're going to give up and
that's what happens to most people
actually if you really look at at the
ones that ended up you know being
successful unquote in the eyes of
society and the ones that didn't
oftentimes it's the ones that are
successful loved what they did so they
could persevere well you know when it
got really tough and and the ones that
didn't love it quit because they're
saying right who would want to put up
with this stuff if you don't love it so
it's a lot of hard work and and it's a
lot of worrying constantly and if you
don't love it you're going to fail so
you got to love it you got to have
passion and I think that's the
high-order bit the second thing is
you've got to be you've got to be a
really good talent scout because no
matter how smart you are you need a team
of great people
and you've got to figure out how to how
to size people up fairly quickly make
decisions without knowing people too
well and hire them and you know see how
you do and refine your intuition and be
able to to help you know build an
organization that can eventually just
you know build itself because you need
great people around you Liz
lose by your question I guess it's
historical curiosity you approach the
same opportunity so very differently
what did you learn about running your
own business that you wish you had
thought of sooner or thought of first by
watching the other guy oh I'd give a lot
to have Steve's taste he has natural not
a joke at all I think in terms of
intuitive taste both for people and
products you know we we sat in mac
product reviews where there were
questions about software choices how
things would be done that I viewed as an
engineering question you know and and
you know that's just how my mind works
and I'd see Steve make the decision
based on a sense of people and product
that it was even hard for me to explain
heat the way he does things it's just
different and you know I think it's
magical and in that case Wow
you know because woz and I started the
company based on doing the whole banana
we weren't so good at partnering with
people and you know actually the funny
thing is Microsoft's one of the few
companies we were able to partner with
that actually worked for both companies
and we weren't so good at that as where
as where bill and Microsoft were really
good at it because they they didn't make
the whole thing in the early days and
they they they learned how to partner
with people really well and I think if
Apple could have had that a little more
of that in his DNA it would have served
it extremely well
and and I don't think Apple learned that
until you know several a few decades
later
last question Oh Oh sir it's over here
I'm sorry over here yeah hi Charlie
runner from fidelity investments in our
financial services industry we are
focusing very strongly on ageing and
retiring baby boomers a huge demographic
we're not that old no I wasn't the
question is different from what it
sounds like it's going to be but most of
the innovation that we see coming from
computer and internet companies is kind
of youth oriented and I'm just wondering
if there are activities going on in your
companies acknowledging what's going
happening generationally not true I'll
give you one example so we started
building in video cameras and almost all
our computers a few years ago and the
response by people of all ages but in
particular seniors has been off the
charts because they're buying these
things now and they're buying them for
their grand their grandkids their sons
and daughters with their grandkids so
they can stay in touch with their
grandkids and their video conferencing
more than then younger people are and
it's incredible what this is done so
that's just one simple example but
there's like dozens of them that have
clicked with you know seniors that are
living independently that want to stay
in touch with extended families and do
other things like that yeah I think that
it's a very good point when you look at
the size of the market that's partly why
it's great that there are all these
companies out there who can see okay
what would you do for seniors
I think natural user interface is
particularly applicable here because the
keyboard you know we're sort of warped
in that we grew up using the keyboard
and so it's extremely natural to us but
things like and that's partly why when
we showed the surface computer I showed
it privately to a bunch of CEOs a couple
weeks ago I was kind of stunned by how
blown away they were but the their ease
of navigation is just not the same and
when they saw that the idea that they
could organize their photo album to that
to it meant more of them than it did to
me
I'll give you another example we've got
a little shy of 200 retail stores now
and one of the things the stores are
doing is personal training now it's
called one-to-one and we are up to now a
run rate of a million personal training
sessions they last an hour per year a
million per year you only started a
little while ago right yeah we started
about a year ago and we're up to a
million training sessions a year run
right now and a lot of those folks are
some of them anyway many of them are
seniors and they're coming in and
they're spending an hour learning how to
use office and they're spending an hour
learning at a video conference and they
can basically come in as much as they
want they can schedule these things
throughout a year and they pay $99 I
think a year for it and it's been great
that's the question now the last
question over there we all share a
common science fiction experience of the
Metaverse or the matrix where we all
could communicate without being in the
same place and by the way thank you both
for providing us the best platform so
far to go to chat rooms or to all go to
a MySpace it's a far cry from these
things that we see on Star Trek at the
holodeck what kinds of things can you
imagine they're partway there that could
be much better than the three window I
chat that we might see in the next five
or ten years well I don't Steve's gonna
announce his transporter I want Star
Trek just give me Star Trek no I think
short of the transporter most things you
see in science fiction are in the next
decade the kinds of things you'll you'll
see that the virtual presence the the
virtual world that both represents
what's going on in the real world and
represents whatever people are
interested in this you know movement in
space is a way of interacting with the
machine
I think the deep investments that have
been made at the research level will pay
off with these things in the neck
ten years you I don't know and that's
what makes it exciting to go into work
every day because there's as we talked
about earlier this is an extraordinarily
exciting time in the industry and lots
of new stuff happening so yeah I can't
even begin to think of what it's going
to be like ten years from now
thank you so much
you